DOCSP-48860: DOCS+ tutorial - Laravel MongoDB backend (#3386)
jenssegers/laravel-mongodb: docs/quick-start/backend-service-tutorial.txt

.. _laravel-tutorial-backend-service:

==========================================================
Tutorial: Build a Back End Service by Using {+odm-long+}
========================================================== 

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: tutorial

.. meta::
   :keywords: php framework, odm, code example, crud
   :description: Learn how to set up a back end and perform CRUD operations by using Laravel MongoDB .

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none

>    :depth: 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :depth: 2
```
S: To show steps in TOC

  of the Quick Start guide.
- `PHP <https://www.php.net/downloads>`__.
- `Composer <https://getcomposer.org/doc/00-intro.md>`__.
- `{+php-extension+} <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/php-library/current/get-started/#download-and-install>`__.
- A terminal app and shell. For MacOS users, use Terminal or a similar app.
  For Windows users, use PowerShell.

Steps
-----

.. procedure::
   :style: connected

   .. step:: Create a Laravel project.

      First, create a Laravel project directory. Then, run the following
      command to create a new Laravel project called ``laraproject``:
      
      .. code-block:: bash

         composer create-project laravel/laravel laraproject

   .. step:: Install {+odm-long+}.

      To check that {+odm-long+} is running in the web server,
      add a webpage to your Laravel website. In your project,
      navigate to ``/routes/web.php`` and add the following route:

      .. code-block:: php

         Route::get('/info', function () {
             phpinfo();
         });

      Then, run the following command in your shell to start
      your application:

      .. code-block:: bash

         php artisan serve

>       Navigate to http://127.0.0.1:8000/info to view the PHPinfo page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Once the application starts running, navigate to http://127.0.0.1:8000/info to view the PHPinfo page.
```
S: Just so users who click on the link don't think it should work whenever.

>       Verify that the {+php-extension+} is installed.

Reviewer: Q: Is there a line they should check for in the info page to make sure the PHP extension is installed properly? Could be helpful to include.

Author: Will add

      Run the following command in your shell to install {+odm-long+}:

      .. code-block:: bash

         composer require mongodb/laravel-mongodb:^{+package-version+}

   .. step:: Configure your MongoDB connection.

      Open your project's ``config/database.php`` file and update the

>       ``connection`` array as shown in the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      ``connections`` array as shown in the following code:
```
S: Or below array could be called 'connection'

      .. code-block:: php

         'connections' => [
                 'mongodb' => [
                     'driver' => 'mongodb',

>                      'dsn' => env('MONGODB_URI'),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                     'dsn' => '<mongodb_uri>',
```
S: The linked to create a connection string page does not talk about setting the connection string as an environment variable. I would use a generic placeholder here instead to avoid confusion. You can also perhaps include a sentence about saving the uri as an environment variable without explicitly saying how.

>                      'database' => '<database name>',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                     'database' => '<database_name>',
```
S: I normally put underscores in my placeholders, but I see there is no official guidance in style guide, so up to you as long as you're consistent!

Author: replaced the placeholder with a sample name

Reviewer: I think a placeholder would make more sense, so there is no doubt that the user has to replace the database name. But I'll leave it up to you!

                 ],
      

>       Ensure that you set the ``MONGODB_URI`` environment variable to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Ensure that you set the ``mongodb_uri`` placeholder to
```
S: If you choose to make it a placeholder

      your connection string before you run your application. To learn

>       more about locating your connection string, see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      more about how to locate your connection string, see
```
S: present tense

      :ref:`laravel-quick-start-connection-string` in the Quick Start
      guide.

      You can also set the default database connection. At the top of
      the ``config/database.php`` file, change 'default' to the following:

      .. code-block:: php

>          'default' => env('DB_CONNECTION', 'mongodb'),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         'default' => '<db_connection>'
```
S: Would also change this to a placeholder if you change the uri.

Author: I'll change this to 'default' => 'mongodb'

      The Laravel application can now connect to a MongoDB database.

   .. step:: Create an endpoint to ping your deployment.

      Run the following shell command to set up API routing:

      .. code-block:: bash

         php artisan install:api

      In the newly created ``routes/api.php`` file, add the following
      route:

      .. code-block:: php
         
         // Add the DB use statement to the top of the file.
         use Illuminate\Support\Facades\DB;
         
         Route::get('/ping', function (Request $request) {
             $connection = DB::connection('mongodb');
             $msg = 'MongoDB is accessible!';
             try {
                 $connection->command(['ping' => 1]);
             } catch (\Exception $e) {
                 $msg = 'MongoDB is not accessible. Error: ' . $e->getMessage();
             }
             return ['msg' => $msg];
         });

>       Verify that http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/ping shows the succesful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Once the application updates, verify that http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/ping shows the successful
```
S: add note up front to note that link doesn't always work and typo

      ping message.

   .. step:: Create Eloquent models.
      
      Laravel is integrated with Eloquent, an ORM that abstracts the

>       database backend so that you can connect to different databases by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      database back end so that you can connect to different databases by
```
S: Style guide seems to like "back end" over "backend"
https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/alphabetical-terms/#b

Author: can replace everywhere

      using a common interface.

      Eloquent provides a ``Model`` class to serve as the interface
      between your code and a specific collection. Instances of the
      ``Model`` classes represent rows of tables in relational
      databases. In MongoDB, they are documents in the collection.

>       Your models can define fillable fields if you want to enforce a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      You can use Eloquent models to define fillable fields if you want to enforce a
```
S: Just to remain consistent with using the 'Eloquent models' term since 'models' is kind of vague.

         Route::get('/find_eloquent/', function (Request  $request) {
             $customer = CustomerMongoDB::where('guid', 'cust_1111')->get();
         });

      Eloquent allows you to find data by using complex queries with
      multiple matching conditions.

      You can also update and delete data shown in the following routes:

      .. code-block:: php

         Route::get('/update_eloquent/', function (Request  $request) {
             $result = CustomerMongoDB::where('guid', 'cust_1111')->update( ['first_name' => 'Jimmy'] );
         });

         Route::get('/delete_eloquent/', function (Request  $request) {
             $result = CustomerMongoDB::where('guid', 'cust_1111')->delete();
         });

      At this point, your MongoDB-connected back-end service is
      running, but MongoDB provides more functionality to support your
      operations.

   .. step:: Perform operations on nested data.

      {+odm-long+} offers MongoDB-specific operations for nested data.
      However, adding nested data is also intuitive without using
      the ``embedsMany()`` and ``embedsOne()`` methods.

      As shown in the preceding step, you can define top-level schema

>       attributes. However, it is more complicated when using arrays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      attributes. However, it is more complicated to define top level schema attributes for arrays
```
S: For present tense and specificity

         
             $stage0 = ['$unwind' => ['path' => '$genres']];
             $stage1 = ['$group' => ['_id' => '$genres', 'averageGenreRating' => ['$avg' => '$imdb.rating']]];
             $stage2 = ['$sort' => ['averageGenreRating' => -1]];
             $aggregation = [$stage0, $stage1, $stage2];
         
             $mdb_cursor = $mdb_collection->aggregate( $aggregation );
         
             return ['msg' => 'executed', 'data' => $mdb_cursor->toArray() ];
         });

      {+odm-long+} provides the :ref:`laravel-aggregation-builder` to
      build type-safe aggregation pipelines directly from your models.
      We recommend using the aggregation builder to perform
      aggregations.

   .. step:: Use indexes to optimize query performance.

      You can create indexes to support your queries and improve
      performance. To learn more about creating indexes
      programmatically, see the :ref:`laravel-eloquent-indexes` section
      of the Schema Builder guide.

Conclusion
----------

In this tutorial, you learned how to create a back-end service by using
Laravel and MongoDB for a front-end web application.

> This tutorial also showed why the document model leads to higher

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial also showed how the document model leads to higher
```
S: Or 'explained why'

database efficiency and scalability. You can use the document model with the
MongoDB Query API to create better apps with less downtime.

You can access the full code for this tutorial in the
:github:`laravel-mongodb-tutorial
</mongodb-developer/laravel-mongodb-tutorial/>` repository on GitHub.

> See the :ref:`laravel_fundamentals` guides to learn more about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the :ref:`<link to Laravel home page>` guides to learn more about
```
S: Maybe direct to the Laravel docs home page instead bc it looks nicer?  
https://deploy-preview-192--docs-laravel.netlify.app/

      .. code-block:: php

         Route::get('/info', function () {
             phpinfo();
         });

      Then, run the following command in your shell to start
      your application:

      .. code-block:: bash

         php artisan serve

      After the application begins running, navigate to
      http://127.0.0.1:8000/info to view the PHPinfo page. Scroll down
      to or search for the **mongodb** entry to verify that
      the {+php-extension+} is installed.

      Run the following command in your shell to install {+odm-long+}:

      .. code-block:: bash

         composer require mongodb/laravel-mongodb:^{+package-version+}

   .. step:: Configure your MongoDB connection.

      Open your project's ``config/database.php`` file and update the
      ``connections`` array as shown in the following code:

      .. code-block:: php

         'connections' => [
                 'mongodb' => [
                     'driver' => 'mongodb',
                     'dsn' => env('MONGODB_URI', '<connection string>'),
                     'database' => 'db',
                 ],
      
      Ensure that you either replace the connection string placeholder

>       in the preceding code or set the ``MONGODB_URI`` environment variable to
>       your connection string before you run your application. To learn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      in the preceding code or set the ``MONGODB_URI`` environment variable to
      your connection string and remove the placeholder before you run your application. To learn
```
S: Just because the code won't work as intended if you leave the placeholder if I'm understanding correctly.

Author: resolving as I used only the placeholder

      following code:

      .. code-block:: php
         
         use MongoDB\Laravel\Eloquent\Model;
         
         class CustomerMongoDB extends Model
         {
             // the selected database as defined in /config/database.php
             protected $connection = 'mongodb';
         
             // equivalent to $table for MySQL
             protected $collection = 'laracoll';
         
             // defines the schema for top-level properties (optional).
             protected $fillable = ['guid', 'first_name', 'family_name', 'email', 'address'];
         }

   .. step:: Perform CRUD operations.

      After you create your models, you can perform data operations.
   
      Create the following route in your ``api.php`` file:

      .. code-block:: php

         Route::get('/create_eloquent_mongo/', function (Request $request) {
             $success = CustomerMongoDB::create([
                 'guid'=> 'cust_1111',
                 'first_name'=> 'John',
                 'family_name' => 'Doe',
                 'email' => 'j.doe@gmail.com',
                 'address' => '123 my street, my city, zip, state, country'
             ]);
         });

>       After inserting the document, you can retrieve it by using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      After you insert the document, you can retrieve it by using the
```
S: present tense

                 $customer->family_name= 'Doe';
                 $customer->email= $emails;
                 $customer->address= $address;
                 $success = $customer->save(); // save() returns 1 or 0
             }
             catch (\Exception $e) {
                 $message = $e->getMessage();
             }
             return ['msg' => $message, 'data' => $success];
         });

      When you access the ``/api/create_nested/`` endpoint, it creates a
      document in MongoDB:

      .. code-block:: json

         {
           "_id": {...},
           "guid": "cust_2222",
           "first_name": "John",
           "family_name": "Doe",
           "email": [
             "j.doe@gmail.com",
             "j.doe@work.com"
           ],
           "address": {
             "street": "123 my street name",
             "city": "my city",
             "zip": "12345"
           },
           "updated_at": {
             "$date": "2025-05-27T17:38:28.793Z"
           },
           "created_at": {
             "$date": "2025-05-27T17:38:28.793Z"
           }
         }

   .. step:: Use the MongoDB Query API.

      MongoDB provides the Query API for optimized queries.

>       You can begin building a query from a ``collection`` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      You can build a query by using a ``collection`` object.
```
S: present tense, simplicity

         });

      The following code demonstrates how to use the ``updateOne()``
      method to update documents:

      .. code-block:: php

         Route::get('/update_native/', function (Request $request) {
             $mdb_collection = DB::connection('mongodb')->getCollection('laracoll');
             $match = ['guid' => 'cust_2222'];
             $update = ['$set' => ['first_name' => 'Henry', 'address.street' => '777 new street name'] ];
             $result = $mdb_collection->updateOne($match, $update );
             return ['msg' => 'executed', 'matched_docs' => $result->getMatchedCount(), 'modified_docs' => $result->getModifiedCount()];
         });

      The following code demonstrates how to use the ``deleteOne()``
      method to delete documents:

      .. code-block:: php

         Route::get('/delete_native/', function (Request $request) {
             $mdb_collection = DB::connection('mongodb')->getCollection('laracoll');
             $match = ['guid' => 'cust_2222'];
             $result = $mdb_collection->deleteOne($match );
             return ['msg' => 'executed', 'deleted_docs' =>
             $result->getDeletedCount() ];
         });

>       To learn more about performing CRUD operations, see the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      To learn more about how to perform CRUD operations, see the
```
S: present tense

      aggregation pipeline to retrieve data from the ``movies``
      collection, compute the average movie rating for each genre, and
      return a list.

      .. code-block:: php

         Route::get('/aggregate/', function (Request $request) {
             $mdb_collection = DB::connection('mongodb_mflix')->getCollection('movies');
         
             $stage0 = ['$unwind' => ['path' => '$genres']];
             $stage1 = ['$group' => ['_id' => '$genres', 'averageGenreRating' => ['$avg' => '$imdb.rating']]];
             $stage2 = ['$sort' => ['averageGenreRating' => -1]];
             $aggregation = [$stage0, $stage1, $stage2];
         
             $mdb_cursor = $mdb_collection->aggregate( $aggregation );
         
             return ['msg' => 'executed', 'data' => $mdb_cursor->toArray() ];
         });

      {+odm-long+} provides the :ref:`laravel-aggregation-builder` to
      build type-safe aggregation pipelines directly from your models.
      We recommend using the aggregation builder to perform
      aggregations.

   .. step:: Use indexes to optimize query performance.

      You can create indexes to support your queries and improve

>       performance. To learn more about creating indexes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      performance. To learn more about how to create indexes
```
S: present tense
